Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) is a serious complication of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT). It can be classified as acute, occurring within 100 days after BMT, or chronic, usually occurring more than 100 days after BMT. Under pharmacologically induced immunosuppression, acute GVHD occurs in 30–70% of allogeneic bone marrow recipients and in severe cases it is associated with decreased survival. Approximately 30–50% of recipients develop chronic GVHD (cGVHD) preceded by acute GVHD in 90%. Although limited cGVHD resolves spontaneously, extensive cGVHD despite prolonged immunosuppression leads to severe immune dysfunction and death in more than 50% of patients.1 Acute GVHD is believed to develop as a result of a 'cytokine storm', whereas cGVHD resembles an autoimmune disease because its essential feature is the overproduction of collagen. Ocular involvement is very common in patients with cGVHD and includes keratoconjunctivitis sicca, cicatrical lagophthalmos, persistent corneal epithelial defect (PED), corneal ulcers, and corneal melting that could lead to perforation and quickly developing endophthalmitis.2, 3, 4, 5, 6 The majority (60–100%) of these patients show evidence of dry eye syndrome, therefore late complications are often severe and rarely amenable to pharmacologic or surgical treatment.7

Top of page
Materials and methods
Participants
From 2000 to 2005, 11 eyes of nine patients (five men and four women; mean age: 36 years; range: 18–53 years) who had undergone allogeneic BMT were qualified for penetrating or deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty owing to severe dry eye complications in the course of cGVHD. All the patients were referred to our department from Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Clinics. Penetrating keratoplasty (PK) was performed in nine eyes of seven patients (four men and three women) in cases of full-thickness corneal pathology: seven for perforation and two for leucoma. Five perforations were due to sterile ulceration and the direct reason was often trivial (eg, sneeze, yawn), the other two were infectious (Escherichia coli and Acanthamoeba were identified in corneal specimens). Deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty was performed in two eyes of two patients (one man and one woman) for deep post-inflammatory stromal scarring without endothelial abnormalities. Surgery was performed at a mean interval of 14.2plusminus4.6 months after BMT (range, 7–24 months). In two cases, PK was combined with cataract extraction and intraocular lens (IOL) implantation; one of these eyes also underwent keratolimboallograft and amniotic membrane transplantation.
In all cases, both the upper and lower lacrimal puncta were occluded with collagen punctum plugs or by cauterization (in four patients with no reflex tearing, Schirmer I score 1 to 2). Treatment was performed in accordance with the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki Principle. Written informed consent was obtained from all subjects before surgery. Institutional review board approval was obtained for this retrospective review and analysis of patient data.

Post-transplant immunosuppression
The standard first-line treatment for cGVHD in all patients was cyclosporine daily and prednisone every other day. Cyclosporine was administered at dosages of 2–4 mg/kg/day starting from the day preceding BMT to day 50, and thereafter slowly tapered until 6 to 12 months after BMT. Prednisone (0.5 mg/kg) was given every other day starting from day 8 and slowly tapered thereafter according to the response. Failure of first-line therapy was defined as no improvement of cGVHD after 3 months of previous treatment or as a progression of cGVHD after 6 weeks. After failure of first-line therapy in three patients, cyclosporine was stopped, and tacrolimus was started at an oral dosage of 0.12 mg/kg/day. Furthermore, four patients received low-dose methotrexate administered intravenously at a dose of 15 mg/m2 on day 1, and then 10 mg/m2 on days 3, 6, and 11 after BMT.
During the follow-up period (mean=21.6 months), one of three patients receiving second-line therapy had discontinued tacrolimus and was in complete remission, another one was considered clinically stable, but not able to discontinue tacrolimus. The other patient died 15 months after BMT.

Surgical technique
The surgery was performed under general anaesthesia. The surgical technique was similar within each of the two groups and all procedures were performed by one surgeon (EW).
Penetrating keratoplasty
In the recipient eye, the cornea including the entire pathologically changed area was trephined using a 7.5–8.0 mm diameter Hessburg–Barron vacuum trephine. In cases of perforation, anterior and/or posterior synechiolysis was performed. The donor button was trephined with a 0.5-mm oversized manual trephine and sutured with 10/0 nylon interrupted sutures (nine eyes), combined running and interrupted sutures (one eye), or double running sutures (one eye). Running sutures were used in two eyes with relatively good visual prognosis, to avoid high-grade astigmatisms. In two eyes, PK was combined with cataract extraction and IOL implantation. In one of these eyes, after the keratoplasty procedure was finished, keratolimboallograft with amniotic membrane transplantation was performed due to limbal stem cell deficiency.
Deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty
In the recipient eye, the cornea was trephined to a depth of 70% with a 7.5-mm diameter Hessburg–Barron vacuum trephine. The stroma was divided into four quadrants using a knife 15° according to Tsubota et al,8 and dissected layer by layer with a crescent knife in the central area of approximately 5 mm in diameter, including the area of the pupil, to the level of Descemet's membrane. The tunnel was then bored out using a spatula. Dissection of the deepest stromal lamellae was performed by injecting a viscoelastic substance through the tunnel into the stromal fibres.
The donor cornea was sutured to the trephination block, and Descemet's membrane together with the endothelium was removed using forceps. The button was then trephined with a 0.5-mm oversized manual trephine, placed onto the recipient bed, and sutured in with a 10/0 nylon single antitorque suture.9

Postoperative proceedings
Patients were reviewed in the clinic at 1 week, 2 weeks, 1 month, and thereafter at 2-month intervals. All received topical fluorochinolone eyedrops (five times a day for a week, and the frequency was then decreased) and topical prednisolone acetate (0.5%) eyedrops four times a day for up to a year, with gradually tapering doses. All the patients needed frequent lubrication with preservative-free artificial tears and/or autologous serum drops administered every 15–30 min.10, 11 In all cases, punctal occlusion with collagen plugs or cauterization was performed at the time of surgery. Collagen plug insertion was repeated at 3- to 4-month intervals, based on the patient's clinical status. Patients who remained symptomatic subsequently underwent cauterization in the both lacrimal puncta of each eye.
Postsurgery systemic therapy for cGVHD was continued according to the haematologist's recommendation and included immunosupressants: prednisone (5–30 mg daily) in all patients and cyclosporine maintained at a serum level of 100–250 ng/ml, or tacrolimus 0.3–0.6 mg/kg/day in patients unresponsive to cyclosporine therapy. Two patients were maintained on prednisone, tacrolimus, and mofetil mycophenolate, and one patient on prednisone, tacrolimus, and methotrexate. The doses were slowly tapered over the following 4–12 months. Systemic antibiotics in the early postoperative period were administered to all patients for control of infections that are highly likely due to the severe immune dysfunction.

Routine blood counts, urine examinations, and kidney and liver function tests were performed monthly. All decisions concerning medication were made in close cooperation with the haematologist.

Data collection
Preoperative data, clinical outcomes, and complications were assessed by one author (DT). Visual acuity, refraction, Schirmer I and II scores, and intraocular pressure were charted. The main outcome measures were graft survival, visual acuity, and development of postoperative complications. A corneal sensitivity test was performed at baseline by touching the patient's central corneal zone with the tip of a cotton swab.12 Corneal sensitivity was considered to be normal if there was a blink reflex when the cornea was touched. If the patient felt contact but had no blink reflex, corneal hypoaesthesia was diagnosed and, if no response was present, corneal anaesthesia was diagnosed. Tear function is presented as Schirmer I and II scores (Table 1). A clear cornea indicated a successful procedure. Corneal surface restoration was defined as epithelialization of the cornea with phenotypic corneal epithelium. Irreversible graft failure was defined as the loss of graft transparency in the central 3 mm due to oedema or surface disorders with or without vascularization.

